# Introduction

The **org.restlet.security** package contains classes related to
security. As there are numerous protocols (like HTTP, SMTP, etc.) that
we want to support and as each one has various ways to authenticate
requests (HTTP Basic, HTTP Digest, SMTP Plain, etc.), the Restlet API
provides a flexible mechanism to support them all in a unified way. 

In this section, we will start off with an example explaing how to guard
sensitive resources and then describe with more details the security
API, the engine support and available extensions.

# Tutorial

When you need to secure the access to some Restlets, several options are
available. A common way is to rely on cookies to identify clients (or
client sessions) and to check a given user ID or session ID against your
application state to determine if access should be granted. Restlets
natively support cookies via the
[Cookie](javadocs://jse/api/org/restlet/data/Cookie.html)
and
[CookieSetting](javadocs://jse/api/org/restlet/data/CookieSetting.html)
objects accessible from a
[Request](javadocs://jse/api/org/restlet/Request.html)
or a
[Response](javadocs://jse/api/org/restlet/Response.html).

There is another way based on the standard HTTP authentication
mechanism. By default, the Restlet Engine accepts credentials sent and
received in the Basic HTTP and Amazon Web Services schemes.

When receiving a call, developers can use the parsed credentials
available in Request.challengeResponse.identifier/secret via the
ChallengeAuthenticator filter. Filters are specialized Restlets that can
pre-process a call before invoking and attached Restlet or post-process
a call after the attached Restlet returns it. If you are familiar with
the Servlet API, the concept is similar to the
[Filter](http://java.sun.com/j2ee/1.4/docs/api/javax/servlet/Filter.html)
interface. See below how we would modify the previous example to secure
the access to the Directory:
```
~~~~ {.brush: .java}
    @Override
    public Restlet createInboundRoot() {
        // Create a simple password verifier
        MapVerifier verifier = new MapVerifier();
        verifier.getLocalSecrets().put("scott", "tiger".toCharArray());

        // Create a guard
        ChallengeAuthenticator guard = new ChallengeAuthenticator(
            getContext(), ChallengeScheme.HTTP_BASIC, "Tutorial");
        guard.setVerifier(verifier);

        // Create a Directory able to return a deep hierarchy of files
        Directory directory = new Directory(getContext(), ROOT_URI);
        directory.setListingAllowed(true);
        guard.setNext(directory);

        return guard;
    }
~~~~
```
![](images/guard.png)

Note that the authentication and authorization decisions are clearly
considered as distinct concerns and are fully customizable via dedicated
filters that inherit from the Authenticator (such as
ChallengeAuthenticator) and the Authorizer abstract classes. Here we
simply hard-coded a single user and password couple. In order to test,
let's use the client-side Restlet API:
```
~~~~ {.brush: .java}
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        // Prepare the request
        ClientResource resource = new ClientResource("http://localhost:8182/");

        // Add the client authentication to the call
        ChallengeScheme scheme = ChallengeScheme.HTTP_BASIC;
        ChallengeResponse authentication = new ChallengeResponse(scheme, "scott", "tiger");
        resource.setChallengeResponse(authentication);

        try {
            // Send the HTTP GET request
            resource.get();
            // Output the response entity on the JVM console
            resource.getResponseEntity().write(System.out);
        } catch (Exception e) {
            if (resource.getStatus().equals(Status.CLIENT_ERROR_UNAUTHORIZED)) {
                // Unauthorized access
                System.out
                        .println("Access unauthorized by the server, check your credentials");
            } else {
                // Unexpected status
                System.out.println("An unexpected status was returned: "
                        + resource.getStatus());
            }
        }
    }
~~~~
```
You can change the user ID or password sent by this test client in order
to check the response returned by the server. Remember to launch the
previous Restlet server before starting your client. Note that if you
test your server from a different machine, you need to replace
"localhost" by either the IP address of your server or its domain name
when typing the URI in the browser. The server won't need any adjustment
due to the usage of a VirtualHost which accepts all types of URIs by
default.

# Restlet API

The Restlet API in version ${restlet-version-minor} has fully refactored its security model
([see specifications
here](/participate#/172-restlet/212-restlet.html)).
It is based on some properties of the ClientInfo class: user and roles.
This model relies on Java security principals in a way similar to JAAS.
But Restlet security API and JAAS are distinct, and some bridges are
required if you want to use JAAS (see the org.restlet.ext.jaas
extension).

The security model distinguishes the authentication and authorization
aspects.

The authentication steps relies on a dedicated filter which is a
subclass of Authenticator (e.g. ChallengeAuthenticator, or your own)
which verifies the credentials stored in the request (challengeResponse
attribute) thanks to a Verifier (e.g. a SecretVerifier), Then, the
Enroler (if any) is called in order to set the list of roles of the
user.

Once the credentials have been authenticated and the User and Roles have
been set by the Authenticator/Verifier/Enroler, then the request is
ready to be routed to the right resource.

If the request is not authenticated, a "Unauthorized (401)" response is
sent back, by default.

According to your policy, some parts of the hierarchy of resource are
only authorized to some kinds of people. This is the role of the
Authorizer filter. In the sample code attached to this page, we've
implemented a RoleAuthorizer filter that checks a set of authorized
roles. You will see that the URIs hierarchy is split in two parts, each
of them is protected by its own instance of RoleAuthorizer.

If a request is not authorized, a "Forbidden (403)" response is sent
back, by default.

Of course, you can customize each part: Authenticator, Verifier,
Enroler, Authorizer.

Regarding the Authenticator helper, this piece of code is used to handle
the conversion of header values (of the protocol, e.g. HTTP) with the
Restlet API model (Request/Response) in one direction, or both for a
certain type of Authentication challenge scheme. At this time, the
following schemes are supported:

-   HTTP\_BASIC (client and server) with the core module
-   HTTP\_DIGEST (client and server) with the crypto extension
-   Amazon S3, shared\_key and shared\_key\_lite (client) with the
    crypto extension
-   SMTP (client) with the core module

## ChallengeRequest

Contains information about the authentication challenge that is sent by
an origin server to a client.

For server-side Restlet applications, this object will typically be
created and set on the current Response by a Guard added to the request
processing chain. Then, when the response goes back to the Restlet
engine, the server connector and the matching authentication helper will
format it into the proper protocol artifact such as a "WWW-Authenticate"
header in HTTP.

For client-side Restlet applications, this object will typically be
received in response to a request to a target resource requiring
authentication. In HTTP, this is signaled by a 401 (Unauthorized)
status. This means that a new request must be sent to the server with a
valid challenge response set for the required challenge scheme. The
client connector and matching AuthenticationHelper are responsible for
parsing the protocol artifact such as the "WWW-Authenticate" header in
HTTP.

## ChallengeResponse

Contains information about the authentication challenge response sent by
a client to an origin server.

For server-side Restlet applications, this object will typically be
created by the server connector with the help from the matching
AuthenticationHelper for parsing.

For client-side Restlet applications, this object must be manually
created before invoking the context's client dispatcher for example.

## ChallengeScheme

Indicates the challenge scheme used to authenticate remote clients. This
only identifies the scheme used or to be used but doesn't contain the
actual logic needed to handle the scheme. This is the role of the
AuthenticatorHelper subclasses.

# Restlet Engine

Most of the logic related to authentication is located in the package
"org.restlet.security".

## AuthenticatorUtils

Static utilities methods to parse HTTP headers, find the matching
authentication helper and misc methods.

## AuthenticatorHelper

Base class for authentication helpers. There are also subclasses for the
schemes internally supported by the engine or via extensions : 

-   HTTP Basic
-   SMTP Plain

# Extensions

In addition to the internal authentication helpers, additional schemes
can be supported using pluggable extensions. Currently, there is an
org.restlet.ext.crypto extension available for:

-   HTTP Digest
-   HTTP Amazon S3 (client)
-   HTTP Azure SharedKey

# Confidentiality

SSL is typically used to ensure that requests and responses are
exchanged confidentially between clients and a server. Configuring SSL
requires the setting of several parameters on the HTTPS server connector
instance used. You need to provide a key store containing the
certificate for your server instance.  See connectors' documentation for
more configuration details.

Note that SSL configuration is closely associated with an IP address and
a listening port. This may cause issue with the usage of virtual hosting
where several domains and applications share the same IP adress and
listening port. It is not possible to associate a SSL certificate per
virtual host because in order to determine a virtual host, we need to
have read and parsed the HTTP request headers to get the "Host" header.
You can only do that if you already use the certificate to read the
incoming SSL stream.

In this case, the only solution is to have two listening server sockets
(hence two IP addresses if you want to use the default HTTPS 443 port)
and then two Restlet server connectors configured, each one pointing to
a specific certificate. With some additional work, it is possible to use
the same key store to provide both certificate. This requires usage of
alias names and custom SSL context factories.

In addition to the parameters that are similar but specific to [each
type of HTTPS server
connector](technical-resources/restlet-framework/guide/2.2/core/base/connectors/overview),
it is possible to configure the SSL connectors using an
[SslContextFactory](javadocs://jse/ext/org/restlet/ext/ssl/SslContextFactory.html),
in a way that is common to all three types of HTTPS server connectors
(Simple, Jetty and Grizzly). Configuring SSL is done in this order:

1.  An instance of SslContextFactory can be passed in the
    `sslContextFactory` *attribute* of the connector's context. This can
    be useful for cases that requires such an instance to be customized.
2.  When no `sslContextFactory` *attribute* is set, the full name of a
    concrete class extending SslContextFactory can be passed in the
    `sslContextFactory` *parameter* of the connector's context. Such a
    class *must*have a default constructor. The context's parameters are
    passed to its `init` method, so as to initialize the
    SslContextFactory instance via text parameters.\
     The
    [org.restlet.engine.security.DefaultSslContextFactory](javadocs://jse/engine/org/restlet/engine/ssl/DefaultSslContextFactory.html#init%28org.restlet.util.Series%29)
    is an SslContextFactory that supports a basic set of parameters, and
    will default to the values specified in the `javax.net.ssl.*` system
    properties (see [JSSE Reference
    guide](http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.5.0/docs/guide/security/jsse/JSSERefGuide.html#SystemProps)).\
     There can in fact be several values of sslContextFactory (since
    there can be several values for parameters), in which case the first
    one constructed and initialized successfully will be used.
3.  If no `sslContextFactory` *attribute* or *parameter* is set, the
    configuration will fall back to the parameters that are specific to
    each type of connector.

SSL client authentication is not configured as part of the SSL context,
although the trust store and which peer certificates to trust are.

# Authentication

In Restlet, authentication and authorization are handled very
differently than in the Servlet world. Here you have full control of the
process, no external XML descriptor is necessary.

The default approach is to use the org.restlet.Guard class (a Restlet
filter) or a subclass of it. By default, this class uses a map to store
the login/password couples but this can be customized by overriding the
"authenticate(Request)" method.

From an org.restlet.data.Request, the login/password can be retrieved
using these methods:

 - Request.getChallengeResponse().getIdentifier() : String    // LOGIN\
  - Request.getChallengeResponse().getSecret() : String        //
PASSWORD

The HTTP server connectors currently only support HTTP BASIC
authentication (the most widely used).

## SSL client authentication

To enable client-side SSL authentication on an HTTPS server connector,
set the `wantClientAuthentication` or `needClientAuthentication`
parameters to `true` (in the first case, presenting a client certificate
will be optional). The chain of client certificate is then accessible as
List of X509Certificates in the `org.restlet.https.clientCertificates`
Request attribute.

# Coarsed grained authorization

For the authorizations that are common to a set of resources, a Guard
subclass can also be used by overriding the "authorize(Request)" method.
Note that this method accepts all authenticated requests by default. You
can plugin in your own mechanism here, like an access to a LDAP
repository.

# Fine grained authorization

If the permissions are very fine grained, the authorizations should
probably handled at the resource level directly instead of the Guard
filter level (unless you want to put a filter in front of each
resource). With the approach, you can make your permission depend on the
value of the target resource on the resource and specific method
invoked, etc.

# Potential vulnerabilities

There are many ways of securing REST style applications; most of the
common and easily usable ones involve a set of credentials that the user
agent automatically presents on behalf of the user each time it makes
any request.  HTTP Basic and Digest Authentication, cookies, and even
SSL certificate authentication all work this way; once the user agent
(browser) has obtained the credentials, it sends the credentials every
time it asks the server to perform an operation.

However, this convenience comes at a price: a class of vulnerabilities
known as
"[XSRF](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XSRF)"
-- cross site request forgery.  If a malicious site (http://badsite)
embeds a GET reference to a URI on a target site, for example, by simply
adding an \<img src='http://targetsite/delete/targetaccount"/\>, when
user agents visit http://badsite, *if they are already authenticated* to
http://targetsite, the GET request will be performed with
authentication, and will succeed.

With a little more work, and the availability of Javascript on the
malicious site, this attack can be easily extended to perform POST
operations as well.  Other HTTP verbs (e.g. PUT and DELETE) are
difficult to exploit via XSRF, as this requires access to XmlHttpRequest
or analogous components that are generally written to adhere to
same-source rules.  Still, it would be unwise to utterly discount the
possibility.

Some good practices for defending against XSRF include:

Do not ever allow GET operations to have side effects (like transferring
money to an attacker's bank account...)  GET should expose the state of
a resource, not send a command.

POST is for sending commands that have side effects.  To trivially
protect these, require some additional form of authentication inside the
entity of a POST operation.  For example, if the client is authenticated
by a cookie, require that the client restate the cookie inside the
entity of the POST.  This will be difficult for an XSRF attacker to know
how to forge.

For the most resistance, the server can present the client with an
application level authorization token, an opaque value that the server
can verify belongs to the right authenticated user.

-   Such a token should be be difficult for a third party to calculate,
    e.g. a server-salted MD5 or SHA1 hash of the user's identification
    credential.
-   To defeat XSRF, this application-level token needs to be transmitted
    by means that the user-agent does *not*automatically return with
    each request.  For example, it can be sent in the HTML of a form as
    a hidden field, and returned via POST in the encoded form entity.

Because Restlet supports flexible URI patterns, you can embed an
application-level token in your URIs in many ways (e.g.
/admin/{token}/delete/youraccount).  This provides an effective, if
circuitous, means of protecting PUT, DELETE and other verbs from
unlikely XSRF attacks.  It also may help to avoid certain brute force or
denial of service attacks against well-known URI targets.

If cookies are being used as a primary or supplemental credential,
protect them against
[XSS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-site_scripting)
by setting the accessRestricted property in CookieSetting; this stops
the cookies from being used by script in all modern browsers.

# Sample code

[Security
sample](/learn/guide/2.1#/307-restlet/version/default/part/AttachmentData/data/Security%20sample.zip "Security sample")
(application/zip, 2.9 kB)
