# Introduction

RIAP is used to access to other resources hosted in the same Restlet
Component or VirtualHost or Application, allowing powerful
modularization of larger Restlet applications.

This pseudo-protocol came to life as a solution for the [issue 374 "Add
support for pseudo
protocols"](http://restlet.tigris.org/issues/show_bug.cgi?id=374).
Which in turn started of based from discussion on [issue 157 "Optimize
Internal
Calls"](http://restlet.tigris.org/issues/show_bug.cgi?id=157)?

# Description

The riap:// scheme identifies a so-called pseudo-protocol (terminology
derived from Apache Cocoon pointing out the difference between 'real' or
'official'/ public protocols and this scheme which only relates to
internal processing of the Restlet system architecture.

RIAP is short for 'Restlet Internal Access Protocol'. In short, it is
just a mechanism that allows various applications to call upon each
other to retrieve resources for further processing.

"Application" here refers to the strict Restlet API notion. Same remark
should be made on the usage of "Component" further down.

The riap:// scheme brings a URI-notation for these inter-application
calls. With that URI-notation those calls fall naturally under appliance
of the uniform interface. There are three blends of this protocol, that
use distinct 'authorities' for different use cases.

riap://component/\*\*

-   resolves the remainder URI with respect to the current context's
    "component"

riap://host/\*\*

-   resolves the remainder URI with respect to the current context's
    "virtual host"

riap://application/\*\*

-   resolves the remainder URI with respect to the current context's
    "application" \
     (so applications could use this scheme to call resources within
    themselves!)

# Use case

Think about some application X that needs a resource Y that is available
on a configurable base URI. Whatever that base URI is, the
application-implementation should just use the
context.getClientDispatcher() to get() that needed resource.

So basically the dependency from application X to "whatever service that
will offer me resource Y" can be expressed in this base-URI.  Thinking
about dependency injection solutions, the configuration of X is covered
by calling some setResourceYBaseUri(...).  That will cover any of these
'service-providers' of this resource Y:

file://whateverpath/Y

-   a local static file

http://service.example.com/somepath/Y

-   an external service provider

riap://component/internalpath/Y

-   a URI resolved versus the internal router of the current 'Component'

riap://application/fallback/Y

-   this application itself providing some basic version of the required
    resource.

Next to this expression flexibility of dependencies, this riap://
approach ensures some extra

efficiency:

1.  It avoids going through the actual network layers versus the
    alternative of calling http://localhost/publicpath/Y
2.  It offers direct access to the Response and Representation objects
    allowing to bypass possibly useless serialization-deserialization
    (e.g. for sax and or object representations)

shielding:

1.  It offers the possibility to keep the internal component offering
    resource Y to be available only internally (not publicly over
    http://hostname/publicpath/Y)

Bottom line: the basic idea behind this riap:// is one of flexibly
decomposing your 'component' in smaller
reusable/configurable/interchange-able 'applications' while assuring
optimal efficiency when calling upon each other.

# How to use

## Calling the riap:

To call a resource via the  riap:// scheme one can just use:

    Context context;

    context.getClientDispatcher().get("riap://component/some-path/Y");

There is no need to register a RIAP client, this is handled by built-in
support.

## Making resources available to the riap

Applications need just to be attached to the internalRouter property of
the Component.

    Component component;

    component.getInternalRouter().attach("/path", someApplication);

Applications can be attached multiple times (at different paths) to both
the internal router as to several virtual hosts.\
 A 'pure internal' application should only be attached to the internal
router.

# Limitations

Note that internal/dynamic resources that require protocol specific
attributes of the URI where it is invoked (like hostname) might yield
errors or unexpected results when called via the RIAP protocol.

Also beware that constructed URI's to secundary resources which are
based on the 'own reference' can yield unexpected or at least different
results when the resource is suddenly being called via RIAP.

In addition, if you attempt to nest applications, the sub-application
can't refer to the parent application via RIAP at this point.

Give these cases some special attention during your design, specially
when porting stuff from other environments (e.g. Servlet app)
