# Introduction

During the development of the 1.0 version of the Restlet API, several
users attempted to integrate Restlet with Spring. They were especially
trying to use the XML-based bean wiring feature of Spring. This resulted
in several examples available on the [community
Wiki](http://wiki.restlet.org/).

In order to facilitate this integration, two dedicated Spring extension
were added to the Restlet. It allows us to provide several integration
modes.

# Restlet as main container

In the first mode, the goal is to leverage the concept of Restlet
Application and all the associated services, as well as the transparent
deployment to either a Servlet container (using the adapter
ServerServlet extension class) or using a standalone HTTP server
connector. For this, you can leverage the SpringContext class which is a
Spring's GenericApplicationContext subclass. You can associate a list of
XML or property configuration URIs (file:/// or war:/// URIs) in order
to have Spring auto-instantiate and wire your Restlet beans.

# Spring as main container

In the second mode, the goal is to leverage the concept of Spring Web
Application as an alternative to the Restlet Application. This is
sometimes required when the Restlet code is part of a larger
Spring-based Web application, with dependencies on the Servlet API for
example.

Initially, it was hard to achieve this integration because the Servlet
extension, and especially the ServerServlet adapter class was assuming
the usage of a Restlet Application. Later we added a lighter adapter
based on the ServletConverter class thatÂ  lets you directly instantiate
Restlet Routers, Finders and ServerResources from your existing
Servlet-based Spring code. You can check the Javadocs for details.

Finally, there is also a SpringFinder class available in the Spring
extension. It hasn't any specific dependency to Spring, but the addition
of a parameter-less create() method allows the usage of the Spring's
"lookup-method" mechanism.

In Restlet 1.1, the Spring extensions received several contributions,
increasing the number of ways to integrate Restlet with Spring. There is
now a RestletFrameworkServlet, a SpringServerServlet, SpringBeanFinder
and SpringBeanRouter.
